# baremetal-operator releasing

This document details the steps to create a release for `baremetal-operator` aka
BMO.

**NOTE**: Always follow
[release documentation from the main branch](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/blob/main/docs/releasing.md).
Release documentation in release branches may be outdated.

## Before making a release

Things you should check before making a release:

- Check the
  [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)
  for high-level process and possible follow-up actions
- Use the `./hack/verify-release.sh` script as helper to identify possible
  issues to be addressed before creating any release tags. It verifies issues
  like:
   - Verify controller Go modules use latest corresponding CAPI modules
   - Verify any other direct or indirect dependency is uplifted to close any public
     vulnerabilities

## Permissions

Creating a release requires repository `write` permissions for:

- Tag pushing
- Branch creation
- GitHub Release publishing

These permissions are implicit for the org admins and repository admins. Release
team member gets his/her permissions via `metal3-release-team` membership. This
GitHub team has the required permissions in each repository required to release
BMO. Adding person to the team gives him/her the necessary rights in all
relevant repositories in the organization. Individual persons should not be
given permissions directly.

## Process

BMO uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org).

- Regular releases: `v0.x.y`
- Beta releases: `v0.x.y-beta.z`
- Release candidate releases: `v0.x.y-rc.z`

### Repository setup

Clone the repository: `git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/baremetal-operator`

or if using existing repository, make sure origin is set to the fork and
upstream is set to `metal3-io`. Verify if your remote is set properly or not
by using following command `git remote -v`.

- Fetch the remote (`metal3-io`): `git fetch upstream`
This makes sure that all the tags are accessible.

### Creating Release Notes

- Switch to the main branch: `git checkout main`

- Create a new branch for the release notes**:
  `git checkout -b release-notes-1.x.x origin/main`

- Generate the release notes: `RELEASE_TAG=v1.x.x make release-notes`
   - Replace `v1.x.x` with the new release tag you're creating.
   - This command generates the release notes here
     `releasenotes/<RELEASE_TAG>.md` .

- Next step is to clean up the release note manually.
   - If release is not a beta or release candidate, check for duplicates,
     reverts, and incorrect classifications of PRs, and whatever release
     creation tagged to be manually checked.
   - For any superseded PRs (like same dependency uplifted multiple times, or
     commit revertion) that provide no value to the release, move them to
     Superseded section. This way the changes are acknowledged to be part of the
     release, but not overwhelming the important changes contained by the
     release.

- Commit your changes, push the new branch and create a pull request:
   - The commit and PR title should be 🚀 Release v1.x.y:
      -`git commit -S -s -m ":rocket: Release v1.x.x"`
      -`git push -u origin release-notes-1.x.x`
   - Important! The commit should only contain the release notes file, nothing
     else, otherwise automation will not work.

- Ask maintainers and release team members to review your pull request.

Once PR is merged following GitHub actions are triggered:

- GitHub action `Create Release` runs following jobs:
   - GitHub job `push_release_tags` will create and push the tags. This action
     will also create release branch if its missing and release is `rc` or
     minor.
   - GitHub job `create draft release` creates draft release. Don't publish the
     release until release tag is visible in. Running actions are visible on the
     [Actions](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/actions)
     page, and draft release will be visible on top of the
     [Releases](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/releases).
     If the release you're making is not a new major release, new minor release,
     or a new patch release from the latest release branch, uncheck the box for
     latest release. If it is a release candidate (RC) or a beta release,
     tick pre-release box.
   - GitHub job `build_bmo` build release images with the
     release tag, and push them to Quay. Make sure the release tags are visible in
     Quay tags pages:
      - [BMO](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/baremetal-operator?tab=tags)
     If the new release tag is not available for any of the images, check if the
     action has failed and retrigger as necessary.

### Release artifacts

We need to verify all release artifacts are correctly built or generated by the
release workflow. For a release, we should have the following artifacts:

We can use `./hack/verify-release.sh` to check for existence of release artifacts,
which should include the following:

Git tags pushed:

- Primary release tag: `v0.x.y`
- Go module tags: `apis/v0.x.y`, `test/v0.x.y` and `pkg/hardwareutils/v0.x.y`

Container images built and tagged at Quay registry:

- [baremetal-operator:v0.x.y](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/baremetal-operator?tab=tags)

Files included in the release page:

- Source code

### Make the release

After everything is checked out, hit the `Publish` button your GitHub draft
release!

## Post-release actions for new release branches

Some post-release actions are needed if new minor or major branch was created.

### Add BMO e2e test configs

[Prior art](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1945)

BMO e2e is running as GitHub Actions. We need to add released branch and remove
the non-maintained branches there, along with the suitable configurations with
recently released Ironic-image releases as well in the fixtures.

### Branch protection rules

Branch protection rules need to be applied to the new release branch. Copy the
settings after the previous release branch, with the exception of
`Required tests` selection. Required tests can only be selected after new
keywords are implemented in Jenkins JJB, and project-infra, and have been run at
least once in the PR targeting the branch in question. Branch protection rules
require user to have `admin` permissions in the repository.

### Update README.md and build badges

Update `README.md` with release specific information, both on `main` and in the
new `release-0.x` branch as necessary.

[Prior art](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1517)

In the `release-0.x` branch, update the build badges in the `README.md` to point
to correct Jenkins jobs, so the build statuses of the release branch are
visible.

[Prior art](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1518)

## Additional actions outside this repository

Further additional actions are required in the Metal3 project after BMO release.
For that, please continue following the instructions provided in
[Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)
